DATE: December 30, 2025
SUBJECT: Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program – Clarifications on Food Restriction
Waivers and Retailer Compliance
TO: All SNAP State Agencies Approved to Implement Food Restriction Waivers
All Regions
The primary purpose of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) is “to safeguard
the health and well-being of the Nation’s population by raising levels of nutrition among low-
income households” [7 U.S.C. § 2011]. SNAP Food Restriction Waivers further that purpose, as
part of broader State and Federal Government efforts to fight the obesity epidemic and Make
America Healthy Again. The U.S. Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service (FNS)
has approved waivers for an initial 2-year period under the authority of Section 17(b) of the Food
and Nutrition Act of 2008, which allows SNAP State agencies to test changes designed to
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the program.
As of December 30, 2025, FNS has approved 18 State agency requests to implement a SNAP
Food Restriction Waiver and is poised to approve more in the future. These State agencies will
prohibit purchasing foods such as candy and sugar-sweetened beverages with SNAP benefits.
Several State agencies will implement waivers beginning January 1, 2026, with others following
in Spring and Summer 2026. FNS posts each waiver approval on its public website
(https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/waivers/foodrestriction). State agency definitions of restricted
items and implementation dates vary, requiring close coordination between State agencies and
affected retailers. Implementing State agencies have been engaging directly with retailers to
prepare them to comply with their SNAP Food Restriction Waivers, as required by FNS. To
implement waivers successfully, SNAP retailers must update Point of Sale (POS) equipment,
train employees, and make other preparations.
This memorandum clarifies FNS policies and plans for SNAP-retailer compliance with these
SNAP waivers, including guidance on which SNAP retailers must comply, online orders and
deliveries, and the consequences for non-compliance.
Food and Nutrition Service, Braddock Metro Center, 1320 Braddock Place, Alexandria, VA 22314
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, employer, and lender.
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized
by statute or incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance
that is not available through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
Page 2 of 2
The success of these projects will hinge on the collaborative efforts of SNAP State agencies,
retailers, and FNS. FNS applauds the many State agencies and thousands of retailers that
have been engaged in preparing for these bold projects thus far, and we are excited to continue
this important work.
Sincerely,
Patrick A. Penn
Acting Administrator, Food and Nutrition Service
Deputy Under Secretary, Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Enclosure
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized
by statute or incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance
that is not available through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
Page 3 of 6
CLARIFICATIONS ON SNAP FOOD RESTRICTION WAIVERS
AND RETAILER COMPLIANCE
SNAP Retailers Required to Comply
All walk-in SNAP retailer stores physically located within a State implementing a SNAP Food
Restriction Waiver must comply with the State’s waiver for all SNAP transactions, consistent
with 7 CFR 278.2. This refers to all SNAP retailers with a physical store location for in-person
shopping in a waiver implementing State. These stores may also offer online ordering for pick-
up or delivery, potentially through a third party.
• Example:
o Iowa has an approved SNAP Food Restriction Waiver.
o All walk-in SNAP-authorized retailers located in Iowa must comply with Iowa’s
SNAP Food Restriction Waiver.
Certain other retailers are also required to comply when fulfilling online orders from a
warehouse (fulfillment center), regardless of their location. When a SNAP participant from an
implementing State places an online order using SNAP benefits and the retailer fulfills any part
of the order from a warehouse, the retailer must comply with the restrictions of that participant’s
State, consistent with 7 CFR 278.2. This applies to all transactions in which the order is fulfilled
from a warehouse not open to customers, whether shipped directly to the customer’s address or
to a designated pick-up location. Some retailers will therefore be required to comply with
multiple States’ waivers. Retailers fulfilling orders from warehouses can use the State-issued
SNAP EBT card’s Bank Identification Number (BIN) to determine SNAP participants’ States.
• Example:
o Iowa, Nebraska, and Colorado each have an approved SNAP Food Restriction
Waiver.
o When fulfilling an online order from a warehouse, a SNAP retailer must comply with:
 Iowa’s waiver for purchases made with an Iowa EBT card;
 Nebraska’s waiver for purchases made with a Nebraska EBT card; and
 Colorado’s waiver for purchases made with a Colorado EBT card.
SNAP Online Transactions and Food Restriction Waivers
Policy Summary
Fulfilled from: Order made available to the customer by: Restrict the purchase based on:
Walk-in store In-person pick-up or delivery* Store address
Warehouse In-person pick-up or delivery* EBT card State, based on BIN
*Includes online orders that are purchased online and delivered through the store’s own
staff or via a third-party.
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized
by statute or incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance
that is not available through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
Page 4 of 6
FNS will continuously review this policy to make certain it adheres to States’ goals of restricting
certain items from purchase with SNAP benefits.
FNS Retailer Monitoring and Compliance Policy
The FNS Office of Retailer Operations and Compliance (ROC) is responsible for administering
oversight of retailer participation in SNAP. This includes the authorization of stores to accept
SNAP benefits, the monitoring of SNAP retailers for compliance, and the sanctioning of stores
that violate program laws and regulations.
Federal law explains that the primary purpose of SNAP is “to safeguard the health and well-
being of the Nation’s population by raising levels of nutrition among low-income households” [7
U.S.C. § 2011] and specifically requires that FNS only authorize those retailers that “will
effectuate the purposes” of SNAP [7 U.S.C. § 2018]. Considering these laws, FNS has
determined that SNAP-authorized retailers must comply with SNAP Food Restriction Waivers.
FNS has developed plans for monitoring SNAP retailers’ compliance with these waivers and the
consequences for non-compliance. FNS seeks to fulfill its statutory responsibility to ensure that
retailers’ participation is consistent with applicable laws while also taking into consideration the
significant technical challenges associated with these bold, innovative waivers.
FNS Notifications to SNAP Retailers Required to Comply
In advance of each State agency’s Food Restriction Waiver implementation date, FNS will issue
electronic notifications to SNAP authorized retailers required to comply with the waiver. The
notifications will explain that compliance with these waiver restrictions is required to effectuate
the purpose of SNAP and maintain authorization as a SNAP retailer. The notifications will also
explain that retailers found to be non-compliant will be subject to Involuntary Withdrawal for
failure to effectuate the purpose of SNAP.
FNS will also add a hard copy letter to its retailer training and informational materials and make
them publicly available on its retailer training page. In addition, FNS plans to update the retailer
application to make clear that compliance with these waivers is a mandatory condition of SNAP
authorization.
These activities will supplement the ongoing project implementation collaboration and planning
between implementing State agencies and retailers.
FNS Monitoring of SNAP Retailers Required to Comply
ROC authorizes and administers federal oversight of SNAP retailers. Through existing fraud
detection practices, ROC initiates and conducts undercover investigations to determine if a
retailer is complying with program requirements. Following the implementation of a SNAP Food
Restriction Waiver, ROC investigators will incorporate attempts to purchase restricted items
according to the State’s SNAP Food Restriction policy, beginning 90 days after the
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized
by statute or incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance
that is not available through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
Page 5 of 6
implementation date. In the event ROC obtains evidence of non-compliance with applicable,
waiver-based food restrictions, findings will be addressed through administrative actions.
Though not required by FNS, State agencies may also employ resources to monitor SNAP
retailer compliance after implementation in close coordination with FNS. State EBT coordinators
may provide designated State personnel with SNAP EBT cards for the purpose of performing
transactions to determine retailer compliance with its SNAP Food Restriction Waiver. State
agencies will be required to send results of compliance monitoring to FNS. In the event evidence
of non-compliance with applicable, waiver-based food restrictions is found, FNS will take
administrative action.
FNS has sole authority for administrative actions against retailers that commit SNAP violations.
State agencies are not permitted to administer penalties to retailers that would adversely impact
their ability to participate in SNAP for failing to comply. States agencies interested in pursuing
criminal investigations associated with SNAP EBT violations must have a signed State Law
Enforcement Bureau (SLEB) Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with FNS. Per the SLEB
standard operating procedures, each individual investigation requires clearance from FNS ROC
prior to commencement. If interested, contact SM.FNS.ROC.SLEB.correspondence@usda.gov.
Consequences for Retailers that Fail to Comply
SNAP retailers found to be non-compliant with a SNAP Food Restriction Waiver are subject to
the following framework of administrative actions and consequences:
90-Day Grace Period
Following implementation of each State agency’s SNAP Food Restriction Waiver,
existing SNAP authorized retailers that are required to comply with that State’s waiver
will have a 90-day grace period. Each waiver will have its own 90-day grace period tied
to the implementation date. This grace period recognizes the significant challenges
associated with implementation of these projects and allows a reasonable period in which
retailers can identify and address issues that may arise, prior to being subject to
investigation. The grace period will only be in effect for 90 days following
implementation and will not be applied to new stores authorized to accept SNAP after
that time-period. For example, if a State agency’s implementation of a SNAP Food
Restriction Waiver begins on January 1, 2026, the one-time grace period begins on this
date and ends April 1, 2026.
First Offense – Warning Letter
After the 90-day grace period, SNAP authorized retailers will be subject to investigation
to determine compliance with the applicable SNAP Food Restriction Waiver(s). If
evidence of non-compliance is found, following the first offense, ROC will issue the
retailer a Warning Letter, consistent with 7 CFR 278.6(e). This letter will serve as an
official warning for the infraction and will advise the retailer to take corrective action to
avoid possible future consequences.
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized
by statute or incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance
that is not available through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
Page 6 of 6
Second Offense – Involuntary Withdrawal
Following the issuance of the Warning Letter, after a period of 30 days, the retailer will
be subject to future investigations to determine compliance with applicable SNAP Food
Restriction Waiver(s). If evidence of non-compliance is found a second time, the retailer
will be subject to an Involuntary Withdrawal for failure to effectuate the purpose of
SNAP, consistent with 7 CFR 278.1(l)(1)(i).
Following an Involuntary Withdrawal, the retailer may reapply to become authorized to
accept SNAP. As a prerequisite to their reinstatement, the owner(s) will be required to
sign an attestation acknowledging the expectation of adherence to applicable SNAP Food
Restriction Waiver(s).
Administrative Review
Following the notification of an Involuntary Withdrawal action, the retailer may request
Administrative Review, consistent with 7 CFR 279.1. FNS has existing procedures in
place for Administrative Review processes. An Involuntary Withdrawal action will be
held in abeyance pending the outcome of Administrative Review.
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized
by statute or incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance
that is not available through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.